This chapter describes the Xfile output module which can be
selected with the @option{-Fxfile} option.

@section Legal

    This module is written in 2018 by Frank Wille and
    is covered by the vasm copyright without modifications.

@section Additional options for this module

None.

@section General

This module outputs the Xfile executable file format, which is used
on Sharp X68000 16/32-bit computer with 68000 up to 68040 CPU.

@section Restrictions

@itemize @minus
@item The source must not define more than one code, data and bss section
  each. More complex sources with @code{.rdata} or @code{.stack} sections
  require a linker.
@item All symbols must be defined, otherwise the generation of the executable
  fails. Unknown symbols are listed by vasm.
@item The only relocations allowed in this format are 32-bit absolute.
@end itemize

@section Known Problems

    Some known problems of this module at the moment:

@itemize @minus
@item None.
@end itemize

@section Error Messages

This module has the following error messages:

@itemize @minus
@item 3004: section attributes <attr> not supported
@item 3005: reloc type %d, size %d, mask 0x%lx (symbol %s + 0x%lx) not supported
@item 3006: reloc type %d not supported
@item 3007: undefined symbol <%s>
@item 3008: output module doesn't allow multiple sections of the same type
@item 3011: weak symbol <%s> not supported by output format, treating as global
@item 3013: reloc type %d, mask 0x%lx to symbol %s + 0x%lx does not fit into %u bits
@end itemize
