This chapter describes the AmigaOS hunk-format output module which can be
selected with the @option{-Fhunk} option to generate objects and with the
@option{-Fhunkexe} option to generate executable files.

@section Legal

    This module is written in 2002-2021 by Frank Wille and
    is covered by the vasm copyright without modifications.

@section Additional options for this module
@table @option
    @item -hunkpad=<code>
        Sets a two-byte code used for aligning a code hunk to the
        next 32-bit border. Defaults to 0x4e71 on M68k to allow linking
        of functions which extend over two object files.
    @item -keepempty
        Do not delete empty sections without any symbol definition.
    @item -kick1hunks
        Use only those hunk types and external reference types which have
        been valid at the time of Kickstart 1.x for compatibility with
        old assembler sources and old linkers. For example: no longer
        differentiate between absolute and relative references.
        In executables it will prevent the assembler from using
        16-bit relocation offsets in hunks and rejects 32-bit PC-relative
        relocations.
    @item -linedebug
        Automatically generate an SAS/C-compatible LINE DEBUG hunk for
        the input source. Overrides any line debugging directives from
        the source.
@end table

These options are valid for the @code{hunkexe} module only:
@table @option
    @item -databss
        Try to shorten sections in the output file by removing zero words
        without relocation from the end. This technique is only supported
        by AmigaOS 2.0 and higher.
@end table

@section General

This output module outputs the @code{hunk} object (standard for @code{M68k}
and extended for @code{PowerPC}) and @code{hunkexe} executable format, which
is a proprietary file format used by AmigaOS and WarpOS.

The @code{hunkexe} module will generate directly executable files, without
the need for another linker run. But you have to make sure that there are
no undefined symbols, common symbols, or unusual relocations (e.g. small
data) left.

It is allowed to define sections with the same name but different
attributes. They will be regarded as different entities.


@section Restrictions

The @code{hunk}/@code{hunkexe} output format is only intended for @code{M68k}
and @code{PowerPC} cpu modules and will abort when used otherwise.

The @code{hunk} module supports the following relocation types:

@itemize @minus

@item absolute, 32-bit

@item absolute, 16-bit

@item absolute, 8-bit

@item relative, 8-bit

@item relative, 14-bit (mask 0xfffc) for PPC branch instructions.

@item relative, 16-bit

@item relative, 24-bit (mask 0x3fffffc) for PPC branch instructions.

@item relative, 32-bit

@item base-relative, 16-bit

@item common symbols are supported as 32-bit absolute and relative
      references

@end itemize

The @code{hunkexe} module supports absolute 32-bit relocations only.

@section Known Problems

    Some known problems of this module at the moment:

@itemize @minus

@item The @code{hunkexe} module won't process common symbols and allocate
them in a @code{BSS} section. Use a real linker for that.

@end itemize

@section Error Messages

This module has the following error messages:

@itemize @minus
@item 3001: multiple sections not supported by this format
@item 3002: output module doesn't support cpu <name>
@item 3003: write error
@item 3004: section attributes <attr> not supported
@item 3005: reloc type <m>, size <n>, mask <mask> (symbol <sym> + <offset>) not supported
@item 3006: reloc type <n> not supported
@item 3009: undefined symbol <%s> at %s+0x%lx, reloc type %d
@item 3010: section <%s>: alignment padding (%lu) not a multiple of %lu at 0x%llx
@item 3011: weak symbol <%s> not supported by output format, treating as global
@item 3014: data definition following a databss space directive
@item 3016: absolute file path exceeds maximum size of %d characters
@end itemize
